# python-project-avanmet1
python-project-avanmet1 created by GitHub Classroom

Start

Going into this project, I had a lot of ideas for a poetry generator that interested me personally but did not necessarily fit the criteria of the assignment.  Initially, I had the idea that I wanted to create a poetry generator that randomized lines of poetry to create what I was going to define as ‘artificial loneliness.’ I soon realized that this goal was entirely unrealistic considering my time constraints. For this project, I would have had to carefully select each line by hand and organize them into lists, one for each line of the poem, and make sure that each line in each list would coherently fit together with the next in order to produce a specific result. This is still something that I am interested in doing on my own, but for the purpose of this assignment, I settled on something much more simple.

     My final project is based on comparing the work of my two favorite poets, Edgar Allen Poe and Emily Dickinson.  Both poets explored frequently explored similar topics such as death, loss, loneliness.  While Poe’s poetry was mostly rooted in an exploration of these darker topcis, Dickinson’s work tended to fluctuate between topics of morbidity and other, lighter subjects such as natural beauty and was not above including humor in some of her poems.  Both poets often wrote in quatrains and employed common meter, making much of their poetry easily comparable, even if only in format.  My goal in comparing the poetry of Poe and Dickinson at random is to produce a result each time my program is run that grants insight (based strictly on aesthetic and word choice contained in their poems) into how congruent their ideas were when it comes to the similar topics they chose to write about.

To start, I decided it fitting to format each randomly generated “poem” as a series of four stanzas with four lines, although not necessarily rhyming because of their random quality. Because Poe and Dickinson often wrote in quatrains, this would be an easy way to preserve the form of their poetry.  For the first result the program produced, I decided to have it select a single random line of Poe’s poetry and a single random line of Dickinson’s poetry and repeat the process so that each new line of the four stanzas would alternate between the two.  For the sample of poetry, I decided to use the complete works of Emily Dickinson and the complete poetry of Edgar Allen Poe (minus his prose poems for the sake of the project’s format) and read them into the program from .txt files.  All of the poetry in these files is then broken down into two lists using RegEx to search each .txt document and split it up line by line so that each line of poetry as it appears in the original document is a single item in a list.  From there, I used “random.choice” to pull a random item from the list and repeated this method for each line in the poem, alternating the list that was being pulled from each line. I also used the “remove” method to remove the previous line from its respective list so that it could not be duplicated as a result somewhere else in the poem.

I ended up including a second block of code as a result of my stopping to read a lot of Dickinson's poems as I was formatting the txt file. What I noticed was that even some of her darker poems sometimes end on a positive or more upbeat note which is not something that can be said of Poe. I wanted to see if I could replicate this result by making the las 2 lines of each stanza pull from her work.  It was an interesting idea in theory but from my own observation, the results did not produce this effect enough to make a difference in how the lines of Poem 1 and Poem 2 interact with each other, probably due to the large sample size of line available.


I wanted the result to be as organic as organic as possible, even if that meant that there would be lines that stopped mid thought or came up entirely incongruent with the previously printed lines. I knew at times the printed result would not make sense and not be helpful in determining anything, not only because I kept all the poems in their original format within the text documents, but also because many of these lines of poetry are far too short to convey a complete idea in and of themselves. Thus being said, I was extremely surprised that the results of this poetry generator were so coherent. With minimal modification to the text files that the lines were pulled from, the final results are surprisingly poem-like, with the thoughts and ideas expressed being, at times, indistinguishable between Poe and Dickinson.

Though the code doesn’t reflect it, I had a lot of issues with pulling blank lines as items from my lists, even after Professor Dubose helped me create a RegEx expression to avoid this problem.
To try and remedy this problem, I used the expression ^(.*)(\r?\n\1)+$ to search for duplicate line breaks in the text documents and remove them.  Going into the documents and removing extra line breaks was the only way I could think to resolve the problem that I was having and doing this manually was not possible in the time that I had to finish my project so I imagined that this would be a useful application of RegEx.

While the issue I was having did occur far less after applying this change, it persisted with enough frequency that I thought it was something I needed to resolve.  I spent an entire day trying to resolve this issue.  Hours and hours were spent looking up RegEx solutions online, trying to write my own, and none of them worked.  As far as I can tell, after testing in my program and on RegEx101, the expression r’.+(?:\n)’ is working exactly as intended and separating items into both my lists based on a single line break.  I went into the text documents to see if there might be any odd formatting that was causing this expression to mess up, but as far as I could tell, this was not an issue either.  Even with this issue persisting, I don’t think it has a large enough impact on the final randomized result to be a large detriment and certainly does not obstruct my program from serving its purpose.
